9 Jun 2017Deputy Minister for Communications marks National Youth Month Themed "Year of OR Tambo: Advancing Youth Economic Empowerment" yy Hosting a film screening and Youth DialogueThe Deputy Minister of Communications, Ms. Tandi Mahambehlala (MP), will together with the Film and Publication Board (FPB) host a movie screening and dialogue for the youth of Western Cape as part of her youth month activities on 10 June 2017. It is important, for us as a nation to reflect on how our precious democracy was obtained. In the process we must educate our youth about the martyrs like Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu who sacrificed their lives for our freedom. Embracing our collective history enhances our prospects of social cohesion as a nation, says Ms. Tandi Mahambehlala, Deputy Minister of Communications."The FPB has also committed to playing a role in the growth of the SA film industry through exposing South Africans to locally developed content. As the South African content regulator, the FPB plays a strategic role in the SA film industry, ensuring that viewers are advised about the classification of the content before consumption" says Pales Kadi, FPB's Shared Services Executive. The FPB continuously raises awareness within the film industry and with movie goers about content regulation (classification and general compliance with the Films and Publications Act (FP Act). In the past we have partnered with production houses, screened movies such as: Andrew Mlangeni Story, Push and Shove, Right of Passage and Cry of Love. FPB will be screening the movie Kalushi which is based on a true life story of a South African political activist and freedom fighter, Mr Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu. The Pretoria born Solomon joined the African National Congress (ANC) in September 1976 and went to train as an Umkhonto we Sizwe soldier. He received his military training in Angola and Mozambique. He returned and was arrested for murder in South Africa in 1977. Mr Mahlangu was later found guilty and executed in 1978.Notes to Editors: Movie screening venue: Parliamentary Offices (Cape Town) Time: 12:00 mid-day Date: 10 June 2017Media RSVPs should be done to the attention of Mbuyiseli (0713538747) at mbuyiseli@gcis.gov.za or Sikelela (0737726574) at sikelela@gcis.gov.zaEnquiries: Ms. Janine Raftopoulos (FPB-Communications) Cell: 071 444 3121Mr. Chrispin Phiri Cell: 083 220 9691 Twitter: @MahambehlalaT Facebook Page: TandiMahambehlalaNotes to the editor The objective of the Films and Publications Act of 1996 is to regulate the creation, production, possession and distribution of films, games and certain publications, and more recently certain online content. This is done to provide consumer advice to enable adults to make informed viewing, reading and gaming choices for themselves and children in their care; to protect children from exposure to disturbing and harmful material and from premature exposure to adult experiences, and to make the use of children in, and the exposure of children to pornography, punishable.Paramount to the mandate of the FPB is the protection of children. Protecting children under the Act is a proportional balancing of the rights afforded in the South African Constitution and Bill of Rights against the right of the child. The protection of children as enshrined in the Constitution and Bill of Rights includes physical, mental, emotional, spiritual or moral harm to be protected from maltreatment, neglect, abuse or degradation. It further ensures that children's best interests are of paramount importance in every matter concerning a child.Issued by Department of Communications