Minister of Communications, Ayanda Dlodlo, reiterates her commitment to see all South Africans migrating from analogue to digital television by December 2018 as per the prescripts of the International Telecommunications Union. Following the Constitutional Court ruling of the 8th of June pertaining to the encryption or non-encryption of Set-Top-Boxes, Minister Dlodlo has on various media platforms stated her intentions and commitment to drive the Digital Migration process forward. The Minister has since moved to set up a meeting of key stakeholders in the Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT) migration process consisting of broadcasters and mobile operators. The meeting was held on the 6th of July 2017 with the view to gather ideas from the industry on how they can contribute in fast-tracking the DTT process.  This is in recognition that the DTT process cannot be done by government alone but involves a working partnership. Representatives of SABC, Etv, Multichoice, Cell C, MTN, Vodacom, Liquid Telecom (formerly Neotel), Telkom, Star Sat and USAASA attended the meeting.  This was the first time a meeting of this nature was held including mobile operators.  All parties pledged their full support to the Minister and expressed willingness to partner with government in taking the process forward including providing any resources that may be required. The main area of cooperation is on public education and awareness to ensure that people understand the digital migration process and its benefits. One of the key decisions made at that meeting is the formation of the Digital Migration Advisory Committee driven by both government and industry players. It was agreed that the Committee will  develop a comprehensive project plan indicating timelines and resources required.  The Ministry has since received names of members of the advisory committee from industry players.  This team is set to meet soon to consider the project plan that will see the finalisation of the DTT process.  In addition, Minister Dlodlo has had further meetings with industry players who have pledged financial support.  The details of which will be made public soon. The  Department of Communications is currently working with the Free State government on the DTT roll-out focusing on district municipalities such as Lejweleputswa, Matjhabeng, Nala, Tswelopele, Tokologo and Masolonya.  Tomorrow the Department is commencing with the awareness and registration campaign programme. “ I have full appreciation of the impact that the Digital Migration project  is set to have in the economy of this country.  I therefore have no intention to delay the process”. Minister Dlodlo said. Enquiries:    Pheliswa SebatiCell: 082 413 4609