7 August 2017 Owami Women and Brand South Africa will host a media engagement on Thursday, 17 August 2017. Owami Women is a non-profit organisation, with the sole purpose of developing and empowering women in South Africa. Brand South Africa has been in partnership with Owami Women for three years, in order to fulfil its mandate in recognising and celebrating women who are developing their communities and playing their part in the areas of education, entrepreneurship and skills development. Bridget Nkuna, Founder of Owami Women said: “The media engagement is a platform to formally introduce the previous nominees as Play Your Part Ambassadors and most importantly to celebrate our women during this Women’s month. In these trying times of socio-economic challenges, it is imperative that we have these meaningful conversations and identify opportunities that acknowledge unity and strength in overcoming these social ills. We need to empower each other, to be agents for change and foster the values that we want to see in society today and build a better tomorrow”. Following the announcement by Owami Women in March 2017 during International Women's Month that this year - Women's Day 2017 will be commemorated under the theme ‘Be Bold For Change’ – a call to all global citizens to help forge a more inclusive, gender equal world. The media engagement is a progressive build up to the Owami Women Play your Part Recognition Awards event. Citizens are encouraged to nominate women from all provinces, who are playing their part and  who will be recognised at the award ceremony on 21 September 2017. Brand South Africa’s Chief Marketing Officer, Ms Linda Magapatona-Seangaret said: “Women have come a long way since the 1956 march and are making impactful strides in the political and economic development of the country. Owami Women is a platform of utmost importance to our society as we need to strengthen pride and patriotism in celebrating ordinary South African women who are exemplary in creating a legacy by playing their part and contributing to the NDP 2030 vision”. Media is invited as follows: Date: Thursday 17 August 2017Time: 15h00 – 17h00Venue: 103 Central Street, Houghton, Brand South Africa Theme: Play Your Part and Be Bold for Change RSVP: Ntombi NtanziTel: 011 712 5061Mobile: 081 704 1488E-mail: ntombin@brandsouthafrica.com Notes to the EditorAbout Owami WomenOwami Women is a not-for-profit organization that provides platforms for deep, meaningful conversation, information sharing, and networking amongst woman in business and at home. We believe that sharing stories and supporting one another as women, creating mechanisms for women to interact provides woman with real tools and information that results in real change in their lives.  About Brand South AfricaBrand South Africa is the official marketing agency of South Africa, with a mandate to build the country's brand reputation, in order to improve its global competitiveness. Its aim is also to build pride and patriotism among South Africans, in order to contribute to social cohesion and nation brand ambassadorship. About Play Your PartPlay Your Part is a nationwide programme created to inspire, empower and celebrate active citizenship in South Africa.  It aims to lift the spirit of our nation by inspiring all South Africans to contribute to positive change, become involved and start doing. A nation of people who care deeply for one another and the environment in which they live is good for everyone. Play Your Part is aimed at all South Africans – from corporates and individuals, NGOs and government, churches and schools, from the young to the not-so-young.  It aims to encourage South Africans to use some of their time, money, skills or goods to contribute to a better future for all. Issued by Brand SA