Address by the Minister of Communications Ms Ayanda Dlodlo at the University Of South Africa’s Annual Media Conference in Pretoria on the 4 of August 2017  Programme Director,Distinguished guests,Fellow scholars and friends,Ladies and gentlemen, Good morning everyone, I would like to thank the University of South Africa for inviting me to speak today and to congratulate everyone who has helped to make sure this conference is a success. It is a great honour to address you on this important gathering under the theme “The role of the media in conflict escalation”. I have no doubt that your conference and discussions will deepen our understanding on the role of media in conflict. To be honest, the debate about role of the media in conflict resolution dates back many years and scholars still differ on the degree and magnitude of its influence in conflicts and conflict management. However, I think we can all agree that the media remains very powerful and can change or shape opinion and thus it is often referred to as the fourth estate. The power of media was best summed up by the great civil rights movement leader Malcolm X. He stated: “The media is [are] the most powerful entity on earth. They have the power to make the innocent guilty and to make the guilty innocent, and that’s power. Because they control the minds of the masses.” “...It will make the criminal look like he’s the victim and make the victim look like he’s the criminal. If you aren’t careful, the newspapers will have you hating the people who are being oppressed and loving the people who are doing the oppressing,” he added. These powerful words by Malcolm X ring true to many of us because our history is full of examples that show media can be used to incite violence. We have read how Adolf Hitler used media to vilify the Jews, minorities and the Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Intersex (LGBTI) Community. In 1994, we had the horrifying example of a radio station in Rwanda that encouraged ethnic cleansing of fellow countryman and women simply because they belonged to a different tribal group. More recently, in the second US invasion against Iraq we saw the emergence of the phenomenon “Embedded journalism” which refers to the news reporters attached to military units involved in armed conflict. The challenge is that over-reliance on embedding as the primary method of gathering information may produce a distorted or skewed view of the events. The bond that potentially develops between the soldiers in the military unit that the journalist is attached to tends to influence the narrative of the events. In addition the unquestionable support by the American media of their government’s narrative on Weapons of Mass Distraction (WMD) proved to be one of the most spectacular failures of journalism in the modern age. The American media did not play its watchdog role  in the exercise of executive power, which is essential for a functioning democracy.One cannot forget the media’s role in failing to accurately paint an accurate picture of everything including the events leading to the invasion of Libya and the subsequent killing of President Muamar Gaddaffi. Notwithstanding the media’s complicity In  fuelling and escalating political untruths and manufactures narratives that ultimately result in military invasions and economic sanctions on sovereign states, the same media has failed to adequately report on and inform global citizens of  the extent of these wars and acts of aggression by the so called allied forces against sovereign states and innocent people. Some countries in the Northern and Central Africa have had to adjust  their budgets and prioritise safety and security for their countries given the proliferation of arms and terrorist groupings in these regions as a result of the invasion of Libya. So in essence the net effect of this, which you do not see in any newspaper or news broadcast,  is the diversion from socio-economic programmes to defence. It should be noted here that the ripple effect of this sends shockwaves throughout the world as would have been seen with the troves of refugees seeking sanctuary in other parts of the world causing concerns of the immigrant issue across the Mediterranean and many borders We must acknowledge that there are many instances where the media has played a positive and unifying role in society for example during the famous Rugby World Cup or the 1996 Africa Nations Cup. These instances are indicative of the enormous role the media can play as an instrument of conflict resolution and to harness social cohesion and nation building. In Uganda for instance, media have since 2002 been used to promote peace especially in areas affected by armed conflict. Radio Stations In particular, encouraged rebels to come out of the bush and to lay down their arms. This worked because of the way in which the messaging was packaged, giving hope to those affected and also building trust among the rebels forces that a grand process of peace was all the government was trying to ensure The media have also been at the forefront social cohesion discussions, along with government and civil society. The same is true in Bosnia, media plays a pivotal role in promoting peace and reconciliation following many years of conflict in that country. In South Africa, independent anti-apartheid media like Die Vrye Weekblad and New Nation, Radio Freedom and a few others from the alternative press at the time,  helped expose the brutality of the apartheid system and its government. They  informed our people and the world of the violent crackdown on any form of resistance and helped them understand what was happening in South Africa. The alternative press during the 1970’s to early 1990’s was the most reliable source of objective, authenitic and unbiased media that briught hope to our people by carrying not only news of the gruesome acts of violence against our people by an illegitimate white supremacist government, but news about global mobilisation in support of the peoples struggle including military skirmishes and attacks on economic installation by uMkhonto WeSizwe, the armed wing of the ANC.Sadly today, we experience attacks on Journalists and the alternative press that carries a different perspective and offer alternative views,  by other journalists and other media houses. We see that both in the public broadcaster and print and digital media These are just few examples of the power and effect of media. Distinguished guests, In many instances conflicts are caused by a struggle over power and resources. Resolving conflicts is not easy as it requires concerted efforts from all sectors of society to be involved including the media. Media is a key player since they determine what the public hears and sees about a conflict. They can ensure views are entrenched through what Naom Chomsky refers to as Manufacturing Consent. We have seen this at play in the UN during Boutros Boutros Ghalli’s tenure as Secretary General where a narrative to pillage his credibility and integrity was driven by  Washington through the media. He writes extensively about this in the book titled Vanquished…A U.S –U.N Saga What complicates the matter further these days is that economic interest of those who own media may influence the types of stories that get reported and how they are framed. On the other hand, the introduction of digital media has taken away the monopoly of control of news and information from the main traditional media. It has allowed ordinary people to be active and join journalists in sharing instant information and news that can go viral in a matter of minutes. We are now able to see news images of demonstrations, riots or coups within minutes of them happening. However, this instant sharing of images comes with its disadvantages as it may instigate further campaigns of violence in our society. A clear example of this is what happened a few years ago when our country faced the attacks on foreign nationals. In midst of the human tragedy that befell our nation, there were those that deliberately circulated false images and information to drive a certain agenda of division and social upheaval. This is precisely because a constant repetition and highlights of images of conflicts can incite further violence and also raise doubts about prospects of finding peace and the value of negotiations. This can lead to those involved in resolving the conflict being questioned about their leadership capabilities. In such instances it would be easy for unscrupulous parties to take advantage of the situation by either calling for regime change, or inciting further violence. Programme director, We have a responsibility to determine the best practice and expectations of the media in conflict situations. Often I ask myself whether it is possible for South Africans to agree on a set of fundamental principles that will guide the broadcasting environment. For example most news agencies in the world do not to show the bodies of their dead nationals.  South Africans always boast about being a value laden nation driven inter-alia by the values of Ubuntu and yet almost all stations do show bodies of our citizens. The media must do their best to provide independent and trustworthy information to the people. In times of uncertainty people need reliable information so they can know what is really happening around them because their survival may depend on it. The provision of reliable information can go a long way towards helping in managing a conflict and promoting democratic principles. For these reasons, independent and pluralistic media matter because they contributes to a well-functioning democratic society that is characterised by informed citizens. It prevents any one media owner or owners having too much influence over public opinion and the political agenda. Most importantly it ensures that there is a diversity of viewpoints including those that are unpopular. This is the most basic rule of freedom of expression which all of us fought for and it would be unjust not to allow those we do not agree with to be heard. As Noam Chomsky puts it, “if we do not believe in freedom of expression for people we despise, we don’t believe in it at all”. As a society we must allow journalists to do their job. We must therefore do more to inculcate a culture of respect for the right of journalists to work freely and in conditions of safety. Ladies and gentlemen, In South Africa since the dawn of democracy media have been free to report without fear or favour, and have exposed wrongs and shone a light on issues that are vital to the public and to our democracy. Free and independent media are vital partners in strengthening any democracy. Nonetheless the watchdog role in a developing state is more than just a ‘checking function’. The role of media is to also ensure access to information which is essential to the health of our democracy and the development of our country. It must ensure that citizens make responsible and informed choices rather than acting out of ignorance or misinformation. Media stories must contribute to our development by allowing South Africans to make better decisions or take advantage of opportunities. The role of the media should also be to drive a discourse that benefits communities and changes lives of ordinary people.  Some might argue the media are under no obligation to play such a role. However, in a world with vast disparities between the haves and have nots is such a luxury really affordable? Or should the media use its influence in society to drive change that ultimately benefits everyone? The latter will undoubtedly lead to a better world, with more integrated communities or the media could simply chose to focus on what drives ratings, or appeals to shareholders.  These are indeed important questions that must be engaged. In most democracies the relationship between the media and government is complex and dialectical. However, this relationship does not by its nature need to be adversarial. I believe that there is room from the media and government to engage around a common vision of building a stronger and better world. In conclusion, The role of media in conflict situations is an issue that has been discussed all over the world. In these discussions media are sometimes accused of being a source of conflict by the way it reports the news. At other times media are accused of paying more attention to certain issues than others. However, there are also numerous cases where they have been praised for defusing tensions before they reach a critical point by giving voice to the voiceless or community members at odds against each other. This demonstrates that media can be an instrument of conflict resolution by providing information that is reliable, respects human rights, and represents diverse views. In South Africa we seek reporting that is credible, honest and informative. We seek comment and analysis that challenges us and provides fresh insight into our world and the challenges we face. We need a media that join us in building a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous society - a South Africa that is proud of its achievements and a country united in its diversity. I thank you for your time and wish you well in your deliberations.