16 Jan 2017 Minister of Communications to hand over bursaries and bicycles to learners from various schools in Vuwani, Limpopo Minister of Communications Ms Faith Muthambi will, on Monday the16th of January 2017, grant full bursaries to two Vuwani learners who achieved top marks in last year’s matric examinations. The minister will also visit17 schools in the area to hand over bicycles to learners. Most schools in the Vuwani area were forcefully shut down for months last year, following violent protests that saw public property vandalised and burnt. Minister Muthambi will be accompanied by the SABC Foundation, which contributed the bursaries as well as the MTN Foundation, which has provided over 100 bicycles for learners who have to travel vast distance to attend school. The first stop is Kolokoshani High School,located in Tshino Village. Since the reopening of schools this year, Minister Muthambi has visited a number of schools in KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga provinces. “Our work in education is directed by the National Development Plan (NDP) which envisages the achievement of a high quality school education with literacy and numeracy at globally competitive standards, to provide learners with the opportunity to reach their full potential. In order to achieve this goal, all ministers and deputy ministers were directed by the ANC-led government assist with whatever means or resources possible to ensure that the reopening of schools in the first term of 2017 is managed as efficiently and effectively, to enable leaners to start learning from the first day.” It is in this context that Minister Muthambi has been criss- crossing the country to provide essential resources to learners, particularly those from poor and low-income families. Minister Muthambi will also interact with traditional leaders in the area. “Traditional leaders have always played an important role in the upbringing of children in our country. They are influential and always ready to impart their wisdom. It is therefore imperative that we continue to engage them”, said Muthambi. Details of the eventVenue: Kolokoshani High School, Tshino Village.Date:  Monday 16th of January 2017Time: 06:30am Enquiries:Mish Molakeng Contact: 082 469 3997 Issued by Government Communications on behalf of Department of Communications