19 July 2017Deputy Minister of Communications and Brand South Africa call on South Africans to make everyday a Mandela Day The National Development Plan of South Africa states: Active citizenry and social activism is necessary for democracy and development to flourish. The state cannot merely act on behalf of the people, it has to act with the people, working together with other institutions to provide opportunities for the advancement of all communities. Premised on this profound guiding principle - Brand South Africa in collaboration with the Department of Communications, Going the Extra Mile, the South African Hockey Association together with the SA Men s Hockey Team celebrated International Mandela Day at the New Jerusalem Children s Home in Midrand yesterday. The Deputy Minister of Communications, Ms Tandi Mahambehlala said: In order for the National Development Plan to become a living document that translates itself into a reality, South African citizens are encouraged to play their part by becoming involved in the process of contributing to positive change within their communities. Tata Mandela followed three principles throughout his life: Free yourself, Free others, Serve every day. Following these three principles the aim of Mandela Day is to ensure that we continue to perpetuate Madiba s legacy in making our world a better one for all, through acts of kindness, no matter how small. In support of this month and as part of its mandate to build pride, patriotism, and a spirit of active citizenship, Brand South Africa, through its Play you Part programme aims to galvanise citizens into embodying the values and spirit of Madiba and playing their part for our country s growth and development. Chief Marketing Officer at Brand South Africa, Ms Linda Magapatoana-Sangaret said: Our call is for South African s to make everyday a Mandela Day. Let s be of service and dedicate our lives to giving back to those less fortunate, the vulnerable and marginalised in our society. Interventions, such as the Play your Part programme give expression to South Africa s commitment to human development. Tim Drummond captain of the SA Men s Hockey Team, who took time out of their training schedule as they are presently competing in the World Hockey Tournament currently underway at the Wits Stadium said For a team to be successful, all the players need to play their part, a country is no different. We all have a role to play in society and those of us with special talents and privileges can contribute by giving of our time. We are honoured to partner with Brand South Africa and their Play Your Part initiative to honour Nelson Mandela and particularly his call for the next generation to take on the burden of leadership in addressing the many societal issues we face today, continued Drummond. As the nation and the world remembers the profound and lasting impressions of Madiba, who is recognised and celebrated as an icon for racial equality and freedom - South Africans are encouraged to play their part towards positive change by building their communities and upholding a spirit of Ubuntu and social cohesion. For more information or to set up interviews, please contact: Tsabeng Nthite Tel: 011 712 5061 Cell: 076 371 6810 Email:tsabengn@brandsouthafrica.com Chrispin Phiri Cell: 83 220 9691 E-mail: Chrispin@doc.gov.za Issued by Brand SA and Department of Communications