 31 May 2017Deputy Minister for Communications to play her part in building safer Internet communities The Deputy Minister of Communications, Ms. Thandi Mahambehlala (MP), will together with the Film and Publication Board (FPB) engage the community of Uitenhage on safer online usage as part of her Child Protection Week programmes on 02 June 2017. This year, the FPB will be encouraging learners, parents, guardians and educators to play their part in protecting children by building safer online communities with the theme Stronger Communities, Safer Children". The theme emphasizes the importance of and value of connected communities in keeping children and young people safe and well. The campaign aims to provide communities and individuals with practical information on how to 'Play Your Part' in protecting children, and also to instill primary prevention of messages into social discourse. The campaign will also provide a platform for communities to be empowered, resourced and mobilised to take action at a local level, as is the take of Mr Mmberegeni Dzebu, FPB's Acting Chief Executive Officer.Research has shown that digital streams of media distribution and consumption are gaining popularity in South Africa. Internet access is itself a driver of these trends which is also available through mobile devices including smart phones. Based on the research that was conducted on the usage of smart devices, the FPB has embarked on awareness campaigns to mitigate the technology divide in disadvantaged communities, and amongst the youth, which has had both positive outcomes and challenges.The FPB will be engaging with various schools as a build up to the main event. Learners from the 12 schools will be encouraged to play a big role in ensuring a safer internet community. The FPB outreach team will also share information with the learners on how they can enjoy the multiple benefits offered by the internet. The main event will include interactive group sessions on internet safety with guardians, educators and learners. The programme will conclude with a Walkathon where the youth will be mobilised to practice living in a safer internet environment. The youth, parents and educators will be encouraged to pledge and encourage one another to practice safer internet activities. The theme for the Walkathon will be "Be the change, Unite for a better internet".The details of the event are as follows: Date: Friday, 02 June 2017 Time: 09H00 Venue: Allanridge Civic Centre (Uitenhage)Media RSVPs should be done to the attention of Mr. Diba Nkume (GCIS: Nelson Mandela Bay office) 079 895 9691 dibandlela@gcis.gov.zaEnquiries: Ms. Manala Botolo (FPB-Communications) Cell: 082 860 6748Mr. Christine Phiri (DM s MLO) Cell: 083 220 9691Notes to the editorThe objective of the Films and Publications Act of 1996 is to regulate the creation, production, possession and distribution of films, games and certain publications, and more recently certain online content. This is done to provide consumer advice to enable adults to make informed viewing, reading and gaming choices for themselves and children in their care; to protect children from exposure to disturbing and harmful material and from premature exposure to adult experiences, and to make the use of children in, and the exposure of children to pornography, punishable.Paramount to the mandate of the FPB is the protection of children. Protecting children under the Act is a proportional balancing of the rights afforded in the South African Constitution and Bill of Rights against the right of the child. The protection of children as enshrined in the Constitution and Bill of Rights includes physical, mental, emotional, spiritual or moral harm to be protected from maltreatment, neglect, abuse or degradation. It further ensures that children's best interests are of paramount importance in every matter concerning a child. Issued by Department of Communications